...

11. Learn your lesson and always order way more capacity than you think you'll need, just in case, because it takes too long to bring more online once you're in production.

The last step is very common in large organizations with lots of processes and red tape. And, often as a result of protecting the scarce resources of servers racked in the data center and watts guzzled by those additional servers, organizations wind up vastly over-provisioned, meaning that they have more capacity taking up square footage in the data center than they need. In some organizations where this has been measured, the over-provisioning can be well over 40%. That is to say that over 40% of the racked servers can be un-racked and taken offline with no effect on the ability of the organization to provide a good home from which applications can serve their users. 

This would be an entirely avoidable situation if it were not for the hard climb and time required by developers and operators to get through the process and red tape. The psychology that takes over is one of having long-lived pets. Because of the tremendous effort required to get these servers or VMs, developers in this situation always ask for more than they think will meet their immediate needs. They become attached and even if some of these servers have nothing on them yet, they defend them and protect them from reclamation, and rightfully so.

In large organizations, perhaps the hardest part of application development is getting into production. It is not unexpected in organizations of scale to wait a whole month, driving through road blocks step by step, until the production infrastructure is provisioned and has a dial tone to then finally deploy your application to the world. Cloud Foundry shortcuts that on the infrastructure side, but often there is still some much-needed improvement on the process red tape.

Part of the solution is to get rid of the servers as pets worldview that feeds this behavior. Containers are a good answer to this challenge. This is because they can be treated as disposable things that can be re-spun very quickly to enable our applications to scale-out automatically when demand is high and then scale-in once that demand dissipates, thus, always right-sizing our compute capacity and energy consumption to what we actually need at the time, and, eliminating the fear and headaches that one must always run through the thicket of ticket jungles to get more capacity when we need it.